Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Darrell Lane.
Janet Morris has written seven science fiction novels so far.
These are grouped into two series, the Solistria series and the Saga of the Carian Empire.
Morris's novels are characterized by strongly developed characters and well-drawn backgrounds,
and they feature hard science.
The Solistria series consists of four novels, High Couch of Solistria, The Golden Sword,
Wind from the Abyss, and The Carnelian Throne.
The protagonist of the series is Estri, the courtesan who gradually learns more about her
real identity and the power she is inherited.
The series, still incomplete, chronicles Estri's awakening.
We asked Morris what she was aiming at when she wrote the series.
I was asked to return to come to terms with the fact that logically and mathematically,
I couldn't come to terms with the incidents of the ESP that I experienced in my own life,
and some of the more tenuous philosophical intuitions that I was having that I just couldn't state.
There's no other way really to state those concepts on one level.
The relationship of mind to probability, our connection to time, whether we indeed are co-creators
in some sense of the universe in which we're living and we're making a future in the past at
once, and sometimes in particle physics I begin to wonder if the universe isn't just giving us
whatever particle we choose to dream up, you know, as soon as we think it up then it comes into being
because we seem to be going further and further down and every time we go down another level,
I mean the quark split up into little quarks and it's endless.
And a lot of times you could come up with a good mathematical reason for something,
then maybe the universe is convinced and it produces, I have no idea of whether that's going to
turn out to be what it is, but if indeed it is, if the anthropic principle is anywhere near valid,
that it is something like that happening, that we are in a sense central to creation,
which would be nice. I mean it suits my ink, it just...
Morris had other aims in mind as well.
On another level I wanted to talk about genetic predispositions and very bright people
have a particular problem with both human relationships and sexuality and I wanted to
talk about that because no matter how intelligent and logical you are at a certain point you have
to deal with what is your genetic conditioning and you really get a snoop full of it in a sex act,
a person who is intelligent and monitors what's happening to them as they become around,
really realizes that there is a different and much more primeval person inside each of us and
I had at that time begun to despair of nurture having anything to do at all with human behavior,
thinking that it was almost everything we do seem to me at that point, time to be genetically prompted.
What Ed Wilson said that the urge to creativity might be inextricably linked to the desire
to own and dominate and that's one of the central themes there.
Morris' upbringing also influenced her writing the series.
I was sort of born post-deliberated, I was the guy, I was the oldest child and I was very intelligent
and I was expected to do all the things that any young man was supposed to do so I had come to
grips with being a post-deliberated female and these people were trying to get to where I started
out in agony, these women's livers not realizing what they were letting themselves in for, I also
wanted to talk about that and the Estri persona is a persona that is in no way
less than holy female while being very intelligent and reasonably comfortable with that talent.
So I wanted to talk about it, it was an injection at that time that was putting into consciousness
to sort of inoculate people against extremes of the female liberation.
More on Janet and Morris' Solistor series on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on Science Fiction and Fantasy
and here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Janet and Morris' four-volume Solistor series has had a highly successful sales record.
With this series, it's interesting to know that although the books themselves are explicitly
Science Fiction, they're packaged as fantasy. Right, the covers in all four of the novels feature
a scantily clad voluptuous woman holding a sword, a scene typical of countless fantasy novels.
And the spines of two of the novels actually say fantasy under the publisher's colifen.
We asked Morris why the novels appeared with these covers.
The difference in that particular case was that Fred Rick Paul, who was my first editor,
who knew what was Science Fiction left, and the other, I guess, operative difference was that
at the point in time when they came out, they could get a big old print run if they called it
fantasy. So it was an editorial difference rather than a real difference, but those covers did not
help me in the least get those books to the kind of people that I should be reading them.
Here Morris goes on to tell us her feelings about Science Fiction and fantasy.
Problems and questions is just as important as showing that you indeed do understand
this or that particular principle, which seems right now to be valid until next week. It turns
out that, well, it just was fudge factor. So I don't know if there's a difference for me,
unfortunately. Fantasy right now seems to be where the writers go that don't do any homework
and don't really understand either this world or the principles on which fantasy was originally
based, the Homeric tradition and a good sense of history and honor and all those nice things that
we don't talk about too much anymore. And Science Fiction is where people write who at least have
a willingness to pay some lip service to a logical mind. Fantasy used to be a lot better
when less people were writing it. But right now there's a lot of very mediocre writers writing,
you know, good and evil fantasy or warmed over Christian mythology, which is not to me what
fantasy is about. I love Conan, you know, original Howard stuff and all the real old stuff and Homer
and Hesse had been, that to me is good fantasy. Science Fiction, when it's good, is great.
The problem exists in Science Fiction in a different form where the young writers who don't
really have a good conceptual basis in Science Fiction use what I call nuts and bolts, which is
just data that they can get from encyclopedia as their science and have a little trick ending in
which some scientific principle is involved to resolve the plot. But for me, good Science Fiction
has the science as an integral part of the development of the story and you couldn't have the story
without the scientific principle or the theoretical questions that you're basing it on. In other
words, if you can take the science out of it and you still got a story, then you shouldn't have
Science Fiction. It should be something else, TV, something like that. But Science Fiction should have
almost the science and the theory or the world or whatever you want to call it, the structure that
you're making it as a central character and that's what it does, when it does it best frees the mind
and allows people to come away with lots of good questions that they can think about rather than
providing tad answers which indeed you have a very limited lifespan we've all seen.
Moore with Janet Morris on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on Science Fiction and Fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Science Fiction author Janet Morris' Saga of the
Karrion Empire is a trilogy comprising dream dancer, cruiser dreams and earth dreams.
The time is the 23rd century and the milieu is earth and several human colonized planets
and far away star systems. The heroine is Sheba, a teenager from earth which by this time has
reverted to a medieval culture. The trilogy describes her coming of age as a ward of the
rulers of the human empire, the Karrion family. The saga of the Karrion Empire is an exciting
blend of characterization, speculative physics and political intrigue. We asked Morris if she
plotted the whole series in detail before she wrote it. I was going to do three, I signed
form before I did them. Three was all there was going to be, three is all there is going to be.
You know, unless something drastically changes then I see where it's someplace that I'd like to
take it. I knew exactly what I wanted to talk about physics and the rest of it. I was,
I wanted to create a female character that had all the flaws that Estre did not,
that was totally opposite. And to talk a little about politics, I come from a very
political background. My half sister was Carter speech writer on economic policy. I know way too
much about politics to suit me. And I wanted to talk a little bit about politics and decision
making at higher levels and what indeed happens to the people involved in it and the people
affected by it who have no control of it. And the nice stuff for me that balanced it off was
the culture that was comfortable with its technology growing into its technology,
growing along with its technology. And I mean for me the cruisers were the main characters there.
I loved doing the cruisers sections although they were very difficult at times to make it really
seem as if they were cruises. And you know one never knows if one succeeded but for me they really
were cruises. Plus I had the whole of history to draw on instead of having culture that had nothing
to do with us. I had a culture that had everything to do with us. There had been no collapse, no
world war three, everything had proceeded at pace and just gotten worse. The problems with
quantum mechanics hadn't been solved, the problems with anything else had been solved and we were
just sort of muddling along the way we tend to do. And that to me was a lot of fun. But as I said
I did the partial and it went to auction in two countries on the partial and I was so
slow to hear in England at the same time had two editors trying to keep the volumes consistent.
Every editor has a different idea of what exactly they want you to do and they all want to mix them.
It's very seldom you get an editor that leaves you totally alone. It doesn't bother you at all
about a book. And I had to split the difference on one occasion between them and one editor wanted
one section to be longer and the other one wanted the same section to be shorter in the same
just the same 30 pages. And I ended up doing a prologue which seemed to satisfy them both. I
had done that. So they work whole-bloodedly meant to be exactly what they are.
Morris told us that she wrote this trilogy with the mature, literate, scientifically
sophisticated reader in mind. Apparently her strategy worked. So I go to these conventions
and they'd all raise their hands and say yes they want more science and yes they were ready to work
a little and yes they wanted to be challenged and I said okay, well we don't. And I wrote a book in
which I wrote to my ideal reader, didn't talk down, didn't simplify it, did what I consider a good
job of explaining mathematics as poetry and just let fly. And so far the reaction to it's been very
good as I told you the first printing has had been through two printings before publication
or in three. It has been doing very well. You get some people that don't want to work but I think
there's enough story there to carry them over the parts that they are not willing to try to understand.
More with Janet Morris on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Darrell Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Janet Morris has written the
Solistra series and the saga of the Carrion Empire. Her novels are of high quality and when one reads
them it's apparent she's done her homework on all facets of the novels, the characters, the science,
the background, everything. We wondered if Morris uses feedback from her fans. We asked her initially
as she goes to Science Fiction conventions. Her answer reveals a lot about how a writer approaches her work.
When I'm researching, it takes up a tremendous amount of time.
Two, because I'm arrogant and I like to control things. On the other hand, I'm very sensitive and
I can always manage to get offended if somebody says, I was guest of honor at Carrion. I did that
one and I'm going to do Lunacon in March because I really like that New York crowd.
Otherwise, I mean my writing schedules are very heavy. I just turned in a book. I just started a
book which is doing just about the amount of time I have to finish it. I don't have a lot of extra time
to do more than the work that I'm doing. I'm real conscientious of my homework
and a lot of times there's, you can never know enough about the subjects that you're writing about
When you're creating whole worlds, you find there's something that you need to know that you
haven't, I mean physics alone will not get you through a Science Fiction novel,
nor will any other specialty, not biology. There's no single thing you can do that's going to allow
you to create an entire culture and change it. It's not just creating the culture, you've got to be
able to create it and change it. So the homework really takes a tremendous amount of effort.
And it's nice to do a fancy book now, almost as a break or a pay vacation because
that homework I did years ago. And I remember all the things I need to know to do that. I don't
have to go. I think I have like three books on my desk, Herculean Stochastic Fragments,
one on Asian Fighting Styles and a Classical Fictionary from Oxford. And that is all I need
rather than, you know, three shelves and the stool and a pile on the floor of stuff that I have to
be able to refer to all the time. So, cons, the kind of feedback you get at cons
isn't as good as I could feedback through letters, but sales figures and letters are really the way.
And also, you know, there are readers around here. I do book signings and I do small things where I
can control them a little better than I can at the real big. I mean, I'll do a World Con or
I'd went to England for a St. Con. I do one or two a year, but really all the time that I want to give it,
it takes me about a week. It's a different person that has to go to a con. My writer is too open,
so I do create this other person, my author, and the author goes to the cons and it takes me
about a week to get rid of this author afterwards because when you sit at that typewriter, there's
no room for you, the writer, you have to erase yourself so that the characters can be there and
the story can come. And if I'm self-conscious or somebody has said something to me about there
being too much science or not enough science or my books of fantasies to get really upset with
those fantasy labels, I'm liable to take it too much to heart and to react to it on paper and
do something to my story, which I don't want to happen because it's something that's happened.
I just got a real good review in the New York Daily News and I hate the good ones as much as I hate
the bad ones. They never like them for the right reasons. So the best thing really is just the
letters from people, you know, who read them three times and loved them, or who asked me intelligent
questions which I try to answer. More with Janet Morris on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Science Fiction author Janet Morris has written seven
novels so far. Both her series feature female protagonists who are neither shrinking violets
nor female versions of Conan the Barbarian or Superman. Estrian and Shebbat are believable
characters. They are women with both strong points and weak points as are most human beings.
Morris does not use them to preach a particular point of view. Morris feels very strongly that
women must be willing to tackle the future head on, be willing to embrace and make use
of technological developments. In fact, she believes these developments will lessen the
importance of physical differences between the sexes.
The same instrument. One can be equal at a computer if one masters the computer. There's
no law. There's a potential for a real equality, an intellectual equality. Now, it has never existed
before, partly because menial labor and physical strength is no longer a great part of what makes
one a functional human being in society and partly because of the concerns of the society
itself. It is not going to happen if women don't start doing their own work in the areas involved
and getting their facility out there. And if I can do it, the rest of them can do it.
There's no reason why anyone should be in a self-inflicted ghetto.
I'd really like to see ladies spending more time trying to become premier in their field
the way a guy has to. I mean, it's a responsibility that one takes on very early in life. I am
going to be successful at something specific besides childbearing. Not that childbearing is in
a nice part of life, but there definitely is more. Although Morris writes about competent female
protagonists and she herself is obviously a very capable individual, she does not necessarily go
along with the feminist movement. People assume that I am a feminist and I really don't want to be
associated with a bunch of ladies standing out in the middle of the street screaming for their rights.
It's just not me. I'm not comfortable with them. I don't agree with them. I don't like oversimplification.
I don't believe that conditioning is a great part of what makes a person what they are or that the
fact that if you're a little girl and you don't have pockets in your pants, you're doomed.
I don't believe it. A great degree of it is genetic inheritance, but one does have control over one's
own. So intelligence will go where you point it. And there are plenty of intelligent women out there.
I'd like to see them do something with that intelligence. Morris is herself, an individual
who aspires to achieve and to succeed. She doesn't look externally for her identity.
I've ended up on panels before I knew better at conventions where I look around me and everyone
else on that panel is a woman and someone has put me in a ghetto and invariably they all write
fantasy or they all write very light science fiction. And nobody is writing the sort of thing
that I'm writing and nobody is interested in talking about what I'm interested in talking about.
I was at one where the moderator said, oh, isn't this wonderful where all ladies will have a
consciousness raising fashion and I just about split under the table. It's just not my style.
It's not what I'm interested in. It's not what I'm comfortable with. And I don't even mind if
large groups of females want to organize for their rights, although the Constitution does not
guarantee any right except the right to struggle to succeed. Nobody's given you the right to have
anything gratis in America just to try to get it. But they're not speaking for me.
Janet Morris is an outstanding writer who made her appearance in the late 1970s. The care she
puts into her characters and into the science in her science fiction makes her books well worth reading.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.